14. Broken Authentication

What is Authentication




Authentication is defined as "The process of verifying a claim that a system entity or system
resource has a certain attribute value" in RFC 4949. In information security, authentication is
the process of confirming an entity's identity, ensuring they are who they claim to be. On the
other hand, authorization is an "approval that is granted to a system entity to access a
system resource"; while this module will not cover authorization deeply, understanding the
major difference between it and authentication is vital to approach this module with the
appropriate mindset.





The most widespread authentication method in web applications is login forms , where
users enter their username and password to prove their identity. Login forms can be found
on many websites including email providers, online banking, and HTB Academy:



      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Authentication is probably the most widespread security measure and the first defense
against unauthorized access. As web application penetration testers, we aim to verify if
authentication is implemented securely. This module will focus on various exploitation
methods and techniques against login forms to bypass authentication and gain unauthorized
access.


Common Authentication Methods

Information technology systems can implement different authentication methods. Typically,
they can be divided into the following three major categories:

    Knowledge-based authentication

    Ownership-based authentication
    Inherence-based authentication

Knowledge

Authentication based on knowledge factors relies on something that the user knows to prove
their identity. The user provides information such as passwords, passphrases, PINs, or
answers to security questions.

Ownership

Authentication based on ownership factors relies on something the user possesses. The
user proves their identity by proving the ownership of a physical object or device, such as ID
cards, security tokens, or smartphones with authentication apps.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Inherence

Lastly, authentication based on inherence factors relies on something the user is or
does.
exploiting weaknesses in knowledge-based authentication systems through various means,
including social engineering and data breaches.


Attacking Ownership-based Authentication

One significant advantage of ownership-based authentication is its resistance to many
common cyber threats, such as phishing or password-guessing attacks. Authentication
methods based on physical possession, such as hardware tokens or smart cards, are
inherently more secure. This is because physical items are more difficult for attackers to
acquire or replicate compared to information that can be phished, guessed, or obtained
through data breaches. However, challenges such as the cost and logistics of distributing
and managing physical tokens or devices can sometimes limit the widespread adoption of
ownership-based authentication, particularly in large-scale deployments.

Furthermore, systems using ownership-based authentication can be vulnerable to physical
attacks, such as stealing or cloning the object, as well as cryptographic attacks on the
algorithm it uses. For instance, cloning objects such as NFC badges in public places, like
public transportation or cafés, is a feasible attack vector.


Attacking Inherence-based Authentication

Inherence-based authentication provides convenience and user-friendliness.
Enumerating Users




User enumeration vulnerabilities arise when a web application responds differently to
registered/valid and invalid inputs for authentication endpoints. User enumeration
vulnerabilities frequently occur in functions based on the user's username, such as user
login, user registration, and password reset.

Web developers frequently overlook user enumeration vectors, assuming that information
such as usernames is not confidential. However, usernames can be considered confidential
if they are the primary identifier required for authentication in web applications. Moreover,
users tend to use the same username accross various services other than web applications,
including FTP, RDP, and SSH. Since many web applications allow us to identify usernames,
we can enumerate valid usernames and use them for further attacks on authentication. This
is often possible because web applications typically consider a username or user's email
address as the primary identifier of users.


User Enumeration Theory

Protection against username enumeration attacks can have an impact on user experience. A
web application revealing whether a username exists may help a legitimate user identify that
they failed to type their username correctly. Still, the same applies to an attacker trying to
determine valid usernames. Even well-known and mature applications, like WordPress, allow
for user enumeration by default. For instance, if we attempt to login to WordPress with an
invalid username, we get the following error message:





      https://t.me/offenciveSec
On the other hand, a valid username results in a different error message:





As we can see, user enumeration can be a security risk that a web application deliberately
accepts to provide a service. As another example, consider a chat application enabling users
to chat with others. This application might provide a functionality to search for users by their
username. While this functionality can be used to enumerate all users on the platform, it is
also essential to the service provided by the web application. As such, user enumeration is
not always a security vulnerability.
Enumerating Users via Differing Error Messages

To obtain a list of valid users, an attacker typically requires a wordlist of usernames to test.
Usernames are often far less complicated than passwords. They rarely contain special
characters when they are not email addresses. A list of common users allows an attacker to
narrow the scope of a brute-force attack or carry out targeted attacks (leveraging OSINT)
against support employees or users. Also, a common password could be easily sprayed
against valid accounts, often leading to a successful account compromise. Further ways of
harvesting usernames are crawling a web application or using public information, such as
company profiles on social networks. A good starting point is the wordlist collection SecLists.

When we attempt to log in to the lab with an invalid username such as abc , we can see the
following error message:





On the other hand, when we attempt to log in with a registered user such as htb-stdnt and
an invalid password, we can see a different error:




      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Let us exploit this difference in error messages returned and use
side channel is the response timing, i.e., the time it takes for the web application's response
to reach us. Suppose a web application does database lookups only for valid usernames.
The success of a brute-force attack entirely depends on the number of attempts an attacker
can perform and the amount of time the attack takes. As such, ensuring that a good wordlist
is used for the attack is crucial. If a web application enforces a password policy, we should
ensure that our wordlist only contains passwords that match the implemented password
policy. Otherwise, we are wasting valuable time with passwords that users cannot use on the
web application, as the password policy does not allow them.

For instance, the popular password wordlist rockyou.txt contains more than 14 million
passwords:


  wc -l /opt/useful/seclists/Passwords/Leaked-Databases/rockyou.txt


  14344391 /opt/useful/seclists/Passwords/Leaked-Databases/rockyou.txt



Now, we can use grep to match only those passwords that match the password policy
implemented by our target web application, which brings down the wordlist to about 150,000
passwords, a reduction of about 99%:


  grep '[[:upper:]]' /opt/useful/seclists/Passwords/Leaked-
  Databases/rockyou.txt | grep '[[:lower:]]' | grep '[[:digit:]]' | grep -E
  '.{10}' > custom_wordlist.txt


  wc -l custom_wordlist.txt


  151647 custom_wordlist.txt



To start brute-forcing passwords, we need a user or a list of users to target. Using the
techniques covered in the previous section, we determine that admin is a username for a
valid user, therefore, we will attempt brute-forcing its password.

However, first, let us intercept the login request to know the names of the POST parameters
and the error message returned within the response:





Upon providing an incorrect username, the login response contains the message (substring)
"Invalid username", therefore, we can use this information to build our ffuf command to
brute-force the user's password:

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  ffuf -w ./custom_wordlist.txt -u http://172.17.0.2/index.php -X POST -H
  "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" -d
  "username=admin&password=FUZZ" -fr "Invalid username"


  <SNIP>


  [Status: 302, Size: 0, Words: 1, Lines: 1, Duration: 4764ms]
      * FUZZ: Buttercup1



After some time, we can successfully obtain the admin user's password, enabling us to log in
to the web application:





For more details on creating custom wordlists and attacking password-based authentication,
check out the Cracking Passwords with Hashcat and Password Attacks modules. Further
details on brute-forcing different variations of web application logins are provided in the Login
Brute Forcing module.

Brute-Forcing Password Reset Tokens




Many web applications implement a password-recovery functionality if a user forgets their
password. This password-recovery functionality typically relies on a one-time reset token,
which is transmitted to the user, for instance, via SMS or E-Mail. The user can then
authenticate using this token, enabling them to reset their password and access their
account.

As such, a weak password-reset token may be brute-forced or predicted by an attacker to
take over a victim's account.


Identifying Weak Reset Tokens
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Reset tokens (in the form of a code or temporary password) are secret data generated by an
application when a user requests a password reset. The user can then change their
password by presenting the reset token.

Since password reset tokens enable an attacker to reset an account's password without
knowledge of the password, they can be leveraged as an attack vector to take over a victim's
account if implemented incorrectly. Password reset flows can be complicated because they
consist of several sequental steps; a basic password reset flow is shown below:





To identify weak reset tokens, we typically need to create an account on the target web
application, request a password reset token, and then analyze it. In this example, let us
assume we have received the following password reset e-mail:


  Hello,


  We have received a request to reset the password associated with your
  account. To proceed with resetting your password, please follow the
  instructions below:


  1. Click on the following link to reset your password: Click
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  2. If the above link doesn't work, copy and paste the following URL into
  your web browser: http://weak_reset.htb/reset_password.php?token=7351


  Please note that this link will expire in 24 hours, so please complete the
  password reset process as soon as possible. If you did not request a
  password reset, please disregard this e-mail.


  Thank you.



As we can see, the password reset link contains the reset token in the GET-parameter
token . In this example, the token is 7351 . Given that the token consists of only a 4-digit
number, there can be only 10,000 possible values. This allows us to hijack users' accounts
by requesting a password reset and then brute-forcing the token.


Attacking Weak Reset Tokens

We will use ffuf to brute-force all possible reset tokens. First, we need to create a wordlist
of all possible tokens from 0000 to 9999 , which we can achieve with seq :


  seq -w 0 9999 > tokens.txt



The -w flag pads all numbers to the same length by prepending zeroes, which we can verify
by looking at the first few lines of the output file:


  head tokens.txt


  0000
  0001
  0002
  0003
  0004
  0005
  0006
  0007
  0008
  0009



Assuming that there are users currently in the process of resetting their passwords, we can
try to brute-force all active reset tokens. If we want to target a specific user, we should send
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
a password reset request for that user first to create a reset token. We can then specify the
wordlist in
unauthorized access. This extra layer of security significantly enhances the overall security
posture of an account, reducing the likelihood of successful account breaches.


Attacking Two-Factor Authentication (2FA)

One of the most common 2FA implementations relies on the user's password and a time-
based one-time password (TOTP) provided to the user's smartphone by an authenticator
app or via SMS.
Afterward, we can use the following command to brute-force the correct TOTP by filtering out
responses containing the Invalid 2FA Code error message:





As we can see, we get many hits. That is because our session successfully passed the 2FA
check after we had supplied the correct TOTP. Since 6513 was the first hit, we can assume
this was the correct TOTP. Afterward, our session is marked as fully authenticated, so all
requests using our session cookie are redirected to /admin.php .
a specified time frame, rate limiting helps maintain stability and ensures fair usage of
resources for all users. It safeguards against abuse, such as denial-of-service (DoS) attacks
or excessive usage by individual clients, by enforcing a maximum threshold on the frequency
of requests.

When an attacker conducts a brute-force attack and hits the rate limit, the attack will be
thwarted. A rate limit typically increments the response time iteratively until a brute-force
attack becomes infeasible or blocks the attacker from accessing the service for a certain
amount of time.

A rate limit should only be enforced on an attacker, not regular users, to prevent DoS
scenarios. Many rate limit implementation rely on the IP address to identify the
attacker.
Additionally, tools and browser extensions to solve CAPTCHAs automatically are rising.
Many open-source CAPTCHA solvers can be found. In particular, the rise of AI-driven tools
provides CAPTCHA-solving capabilities by utilizing powerful image recognition or
Further resources include SecLists Default Credentials as well as the SCADA GitHub
repository which contains a list of default passwords for a variety of different vendors.

A targeted internet search is a different way of obtaining default credentials for a web
application. Let us assume we stumble across a BookStack web application during an
engagement:





We can try to search for default credentials by searching something like bookstack default
credentials :


      https://t.me/offenciveSec
As we can see, the results contain the installation instructions for BookStack, which state
that the default admin credentials are [email protected]:password .

Vulnerable Password Reset




We have already discussed how to brute-force password reset tokens to take over a victim's
account. However, even if a web application utilizes rate limiting and CAPTCHAs, business
logic bugs within the password reset functionality can allow taking over other users'
accounts.


Guessable Password Reset Questions

Often, web applications authenticate users who have lost their passwords by requesting that
they answer one or multiple security questions.
We can
As an example, we will target the user admin . After specifying the username, we must
answer the user's security question. The corresponding request looks like this:





We can set up the corresponding ffuf command from this request to brute-force the
answer. Keep in mind that we need to specify our session cookie to associate our request
with the username admin we specified in the previous step:


  ffuf -w ./city_wordlist.txt -u http://pwreset.htb/security_question.php -X
  POST -H "Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded" -b
  "PHPSESSID=39b54j201u3rhu4tab1pvdb4pv" -d "security_response=FUZZ" -fr
  "Incorrect response."


  <SNIP>


  [Status: 302, Size: 0, Words: 1, Lines: 1, Duration: 0ms]
      * FUZZ: Houston



After obtaining the security response, we can reset the admin user's password and entirely
take over the account:





We could narrow down the cities if we had additional information on our target to reduce the
time required for our brute-force attack on the security question. For instance, if we knew
that our target user was from Germany, we could create a wordlist containing only German
cities, reducing the number to about a thousand cities:

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Manipulating the Reset Request

Another instance of a flawed password reset logic occurs when a user can manipulate a
potentially hidden parameter to reset the password of a different account.

For instance, consider the following password reset flow, which is
Supplying the security response London results in the following request:


  POST /security_question.php HTTP/1.1
  Host: pwreset.htb
  Content-Length: 43
  Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  Cookie: PHPSESSID=39b54j201u3rhu4tab1pvdb4pv


  security_response=London&username=htb-stdnt



As we can see, the username is contained in the form as a hidden parameter and sent along
with the security response. Finally, we can reset the user's password:





The final request looks like this:


  POST /reset_password.php HTTP/1.1
  Host: pwreset.htbhttps://t.me/offenciveSec
  Content-Length: 36
  Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  Cookie: PHPSESSID=39b54j201u3rhu4tab1pvdb4pv


  password=P@$$w0rd&username=htb-stdnt



Like the previous request, the request contains the username in a separate POST
parameter. Suppose the web application does properly verify that the usernames in both
requests match. In that case, we can skip the security question or supply the answer to our
security question and then set the password of an entirely different account. For instance, we
can change the admin user's password by manipulating the username parameter of the
password reset request:


  POST /reset_password.php HTTP/1.1
  Host: pwreset.htb
  Content-Length: 32
  Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
  Cookie: PHPSESSID=39b54j201u3rhu4tab1pvdb4pv


  password=P@$$w0rd&username=admin



To prevent this vulnerability, keeping a consistent state during the entire password reset
process is essential. Resetting an account's password is a sensitive process where minor
implementation flaws or logic bugs can enable an attacker to take over other users'
accounts. As such, we should investigate the password reset functionality of any web
application closely and keep an eye out for potential security issues.

Authentication Bypass via Direct Access




After discussing various attacks on flawed authentication implementations, this section will
showcase vulnerabilities that allow for the complete bypassing of authentication
mechanisms.


Direct Access

The most straightforward way of bypassing authentication checks is to request the protected
resource directly from an unauthenticated context. An unauthenticated attacker can access
protected information if the web application does not properly verify that the request is
authenticated.
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
For instance, let us assume that we know that the web application redirects users to the
/admin.php endpoint after successful authentication, providing protected information only to
authenticated users. If the web application relies solely on the login page to authenticate
users, we can access the protected resource directly by accessing the /admin.php
endpoint.

While this scenario is uncommon in the real world, a slight variant occasionally happens in
vulnerable web applications. To illustrate the vulnerability, let us assume a web application
uses the following snippet of PHP code to verify whether a user is authenticated:


  if(!$_SESSION['active']) {
          header("Location: index.php");
  }



This code redirects the user to /index.php  if the session is not active, i.e., if the user is not
authenticated. However, the PHP script does not stop execution, resulting in protected
information within the page being sent in the response body:





As we can see, the entire admin page is contained in the response body. However, if we
attempt to access the page in our web browser, the browser follows the redirect and displays
the login prompt instead of the protected admin page. We can easily trick the browser into
displaying the admin page by intercepting the response and changing the status code from
302 to 200 . To do this, enable Intercept in Burp. Afterward, browse to the /admin.php
endpoint in the web browser. Next, right-click on the request and select Do intercept >
Response to this request to intercept the response:


      https://t.me/offenciveSec
Afterward, forward the request by clicking on Forward . Since we intercepted the response,
we can now edit it. To force the browser to display the content, we need to change the status
code from 302 Found to 200 OK :





Afterward, we can forward the response. If we switch back to our browser window, we can
see that the protected information is rendered:





To prevent the protected information from being returned in the body of the redirect
response, the PHP script needs to exit after issuing the redirect:


  if(!$_SESSION['active']) {
          header("Location: index.php");
          exit;
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
  }


Authentication Bypass via Parameter
Modification




An authentication implementation can be flawed if it depends on the presence or value of an
HTTP parameter, introducing authentication vulnerabilities. As in the previous section, such
vulnerabilities might lead to authentication and authorization bypasses, allowing for privilege
escalation.

This type of vulnerability is closely related to authorization issues such as Insecure Direct
Object Reference (IDOR) vulnerabilities, which are covered in more detail in the Web
Attacks module.


Parameter Modification

Let us take a look at our target web application. This time, we are provided with credentials
for the user htb-stdnt . After logging in, we are redirected to /admin.php?user_id=183 :





In our web browser, we can see that we seem to be lacking privileges, as we can only see a
part of the available data:





      https://t.me/offenciveSec
To investigate the purpose of the user_id parameter, let us remove it from our request to
/admin.php . When doing so, we are redirected back to the login screen at /index.php ,
even though our session provided in the PHPSESSID cookie is still valid:





Thus, we can assume that the parameter user_id is related to authentication. We can
bypass authentication entirely by accessing the URL /admin.php?user_id=183 directly:





Based on the parameter name user_id , we can infer that the parameter specifies the
Session tokens are unique identifiers a web application uses to identify a user. More
specifically, the session token is tied to the user's session. If an attacker can obtain a valid
session token of another user, the attacker can impersonate the user to the web application,
thus taking over their session.


Brute-Force Attack

Suppose a session token does not provide sufficient randomness and is cryptographically
weak. In that case, we can brute-force valid session tokens similarly to how we were able to
brute-force valid password-reset tokens. This can happen if a session token is too short or
contains static data that does not provide randomness to the token, i.e., the token provides
insufficient entropy.

For instance, consider the following web application that assigns a four-character session
token:





As we have seen in previous sections, a four-character string can easily be brute-forced.
Thus, we can use the techniques and commands discussed in the Brute-Force Attacks
sections to brute-force all possible session tokens and hijack all active sessions.

This scenario is relatively uncommon in the real world. In a slightly more common variant,
the session token itself provides sufficient length; however, the token consists of hardcoded
prepended and appended values, while only a small part of the session token is dynamic to
provide randomness. For instance, consider the following session token assigned by a web
application:





The session token is 32 characters long; thus, it seems infeasible to enumerate other users'
valid sessions. However, let us send the login request multiple times and take note of the
session tokens assigned by the web application. This results in the following session tokens:


  2c0c58b27c71a2ec5bf2b4b6e892b9f9
  2c0c58b27c71a2ec5bf2b4546092b9f9
  2c0c58b27c71a2ec5bf2b497f592b9f9
      https://t.me/offenciveSec
As we can see, all session tokens are very similar. In fact, of the 32 characters, 28 are the
same for all five captured sessions. The session tokens consist of the static string
2c0c58b27c71a2ec5bf2b4 followed by four random characters and the static string
92b9f9 .
While this session token might seem random at first, a simple analysis reveals that it is
base64-encoded data:





As we can see, the cookie contains information about the user and the role tied to the
session. However, there is no security measure in place that prevents us from tampering
with the data.
like plain encoding. Improper handling of cryptographic algorithms or injection of user-
provided data into the input of an encryption function can lead to vulnerabilities in the
session token generation. However, it is often challenging to attack encryption-based
session tokens in a black box approach without access to the source code responsible for
session token generation.

Further Session Attacks




After discussing how to attack session tokens, we will now understand two attack vectors
against flawed handling of session tokens in web applications.

More advanced session attacks, such as Session Puzzling, are covered in the Abusing
HTTP Misconfigurations module.


Session Fixation

Session Fixation is an attack that enables an attacker to obtain a victim's valid session. A
web application vulnerable to session fixation does not assign a new session token after a
successful authentication. If an attacker can coerce the victim into using a session token
chosen by the attacker, session fixation enables an attacker to steal the victim's session and
access their account.

For instance, assume a web application vulnerable to session fixation uses a session token
in the HTTP cookie session . Furthermore, the web application sets the user's session
cookie to a value provided in the sid GET parameter. Under these circumstances, a
session fixation attack could look like this:

   1. An attacker obtains a valid session token by authenticating to the web application. For
     instance, let us assume the session token is a1b2c3d4e5f6 . Afterward, the attacker
     invalidates their session by logging out.
   2. The attacker tricks the victim to use the known session token by sending the following
      link: http://vulnerable.htb/?sid=a1b2c3d4e5f6 . When the victim clicks this link,
     the web application sets the session cookie to the provided value, i.e., the response
     looks like this:


  HTTP/1.1 200 OK
  [...]
  Set-Cookie: session=a1b2c3d4e5f6
  [...]

      https://t.me/offenciveSec
A web application must assign a new randomly generated session token after successful
authentication to prevent session fixation attacks.


Improper Session Timeout

Lastly, a web application must define a proper Session Timeout for a session token. After the
time interval defined in the session timeout has passed, the session will expire, and the
session token is no longer accepted. If a web application does not define a session timeout,
the session token would be valid infinitely, enabling an attacker to use a hijacked session
effectively forever.

For the security of a web application, the session timeout must be appropriately set.
Because each web application has different business requirements, there is no universal
session timeout value.